# Project: Cloud Data Warehouse

## Introduction
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database and want to move their processes and data onto the cloud. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As their data engineer, I have built an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of dimensional tables for their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to. I have tested the database and ETL pipeline by running queries given by the analytics team from Sparkify and compared the results with their expected results.


## Project Objective
The project delivers a AWS Redshift Data Warehouse that is built based on the Sparkify data that can be used by the Sparkify data analytics team to perform their analysis by directly running the queries or use a BI tool.

## Project Datasets

### 1. Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

### 2. Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

## Schema for Song Play Analysis
Using the song and event datasets, you'll need to create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

### Fact Table
**songplays** - records in event data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong songplay_id(PRIMARY KEY SORTKEY), start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

### Dimension Tables
**users** - users in the app consists of columns user_id(PRIMARY KEY DISTKEY), first_name, last_name, gender, level
**songs** - songs in music database consists of columns  song_id(PRIMARY KEY), title, artist_id(DISTKEY), year, duration
**artists** - artists in music database consists of columns  artist_id(PRIMARY KEY DISTKEY), name, location, lattitude, longitude
**time** - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units consists of columns start_time(PRIMARY KEY SORTKEY DISTKEY), hour, day, week, month, year, weekday


## The project files:##

1. create_table.py - Creates fact and dimension tables for the star schema in Redshift.
2. etl.py          - Loads data from S3 into staging tables on Redshift and then process that data into your analytics tables on Redshift.
3. sql_queries.py  - Defines SQL statements, which will be imported into the two other files above. Requires dwh.cfg file for connection details.
4. dwh.cfg         - Contains AWS host details such as server, port etc, IAM role and S3 connection information.(Actual values have been removed for security)
5. README.md       - Provides discussion on process and decisions for this ETL pipeline.

### ETL Pipeline ###

1. Execution of create_tables.py creates fact and dimesion tables in Redshift.
2. Execution of etl.py loads data from S3 to staging tables on Redshift and loads data from staging tables to analytics tables on Redshift.
3. Analytic queries on Redshift database can be executed based on the data already loaded(optional step).

Note: Step 1 and 2 is to be executed in the same order from the terminal, Step 3(optional) is to be executed from the Redshift query space available in the AWS site.